---
layout: default
title: "CS 370 - Test equation for multistep schemes"
colour: "#BBBBFF"
---


$$
\newcommand{\x}{\mathbf x}
\newcommand{\y}{\mathbf y}
\newcommand{\z}{\mathbf z}
\newcommand{\f}{\mathbf f}
\newcommand{\A}{\mathbf A}
\newcommand{\D}{\mathbf D}
\newcommand{\P}{\mathbf P}

\newcommand{\parens}[1]{\left( #1 \right)}
\newcommand{\curlies}[1]{\left\{ #1 \right\}}
\newcommand{\abs}[1]{\left| #1 \right|}
\newcommand{\norm}[1]{\left\lVert \vphantom{A} #1 \right\rVert}
\newcommand{\inv}[1]{#1^{-1}}
$$

In CS 370, we learn to analyze stability of an ODE time stepping scheme by checking whether it successfully integrates the test equation:

$$
y' = -\lambda y
$$

For single-step schemes, i.e. time integration schemes that step from $y^n$ to $y^{n+1}$, this is simple: we simply evaluate the time step rule for the test equation, and determine an analytical formula for $y^n$ based on $y^0$. For example, with forward Euler:

$$
\frac{y^{n+1} - y^n}{\Delta t} = f(t^n, y^n)
$$

Substituting in the test equation, we get

$$
\begin{align*}
\frac{y^{n+1} - y^n}{\Delta t} &= -\lambda y^n \\
y^{n+1} &= y^n - \Delta t \lambda y^n \\
&= (1 - \Delta t \lambda) y^n \\
y^{n+2} &= (1 - \Delta t \lambda) y^{n+1} \\
&= (1 - \Delta t \lambda)^2 y^n \\
&\ \ \vdots \\
y^n &= (1 - \Delta t \lambda)^n y^0
\end{align*}
$$

This blows up as long as $\abs{1 - \Delta t \lambda} > 1$, i.e. $h > \dfrac{\lambda}{2}$, so the forward Euler scheme is only conditionally stable.

Let's try with BDF2 now:

$$
\frac{\frac{3}{2} y^{n+1} - 2y^n + \frac{1}{2} y^{n-1}}{\Delta t} = f(t^{n+1}, y^{n+1})
$$

Substituting in the test equation's right hand side, we get

$$
\begin{align*}
\frac{\frac{3}{2} y^{n+1} - 2y^n + \frac{1}{2} y^{n-1}}{\Delta t} &= -\lambda y^{n+1} \\
\frac{3}{2} y^{n+1} + \Delta t \lambda y^{n+1} &= 2y^n - \frac{1}{2} y^{n-1} \\
y^{n+1} &= \frac{2y^n - \frac{1}{2} y^{n-1}}{\frac{3}{2} + \Delta t \lambda} \\
&= \frac{4y^n - y^{n-1}}{3 + 2\Delta t \lambda}
\end{align*}
$$

I've had a few students ask over the years, what do we even do with this now? We can't put $y^{n+1}$ in terms of just $y^n$, as it depends on $y^{n-1}$ as well. How do we figure out whether the solution blows up? It turns out, it is possible to figure out a closed form solution.

## Solving a linear recurrence

Since $y^{n+1}$ depends on the previous *two* terms, let's try dealing with vectors of combined terms:

$$
\y^n = \begin{pmatrix} y^n \\ y^{n-1} \end{pmatrix}
$$

Now we can write $\y^{n+1}$ in terms of just $\y^n$:

$$
\begin{align*}
\y^{n+1} &= \begin{pmatrix} y^{n+1} \\ y^n \end{pmatrix}  \\
&= \begin{pmatrix} \frac{4y^n - y^{n-1}}{3 + 2\Delta t \lambda} \\ y^n \end{pmatrix} \tag{from earlier} \\
&= \begin{pmatrix} \frac{4}{3 + 2\Delta t \lambda} \cdot y^n + \frac{-1}{3 + 2\Delta t \lambda} \cdot y^{n-1} \\
1 \cdot y^n + 0 \cdot y^{n-1}\end{pmatrix} \\
&= \underbrace{\begin{pmatrix} \frac{4}{3 + 2\Delta t \lambda} & \frac{-1}{3 + 2\Delta t \lambda} \\ 1 & 0 \end{pmatrix}}_\A \begin{pmatrix} y^n \\ y^{n-1} \end{pmatrix} \\
&= \A \y^n
\end{align*}
$$

Now, just like with forward Euler, we've found that $\y^{n+1}$ is *something* times $\y^n$, except this time it's matrix-vector multiplication rather than scalar multiplication. But no matter! $\A$ is constant, so we can still combine terms of this sequence to find that

$$
\y^n = \A^n \y^0
$$

And so this must blow up if $\A^n$ blows up, just like before. But how can we tell if $\A^n$ blows up?

## Diagonalizing and exponentiating

Suppose $\phi$ is an eigenvalue of $\A$. Then,

$$
\begin{align*}
\begin{vmatrix} \frac{4}{3 + 2\Delta t \lambda} - \phi & \frac{-1}{3 + 2\Delta t \lambda} \\ 1 & 0 - \phi \end{vmatrix} &= 0 \\
\phi^2 - \frac{4 \phi}{3 + 2\Delta t \lambda} + \frac{1}{3 + 2\Delta t \lambda} &= 0 \\
(3 + 2\Delta t \lambda) \phi^2 - 4\phi + 1 &= 0 \\
\phi &= \frac{4 \pm \sqrt{16 - 12 - 8 \Delta t \lambda}}{6 + 4 \Delta t \lambda} \\
&= \frac{2 \pm \sqrt{4 - 2 \Delta t \lambda}}{3 + 2 \Delta t \lambda}
\end{align*}
$$

So the two solutions we got for $\phi$ are the eigenvalues of $\A$ - let's call them $\phi_1$ and $\phi_2$. Now let's diagonalize $\A$: suppose $\mathbf P$ is the matrix of eigenvectors of $\A$, and

$$
\D = \begin{pmatrix} \phi_1 & \\ & \phi_2 \end{pmatrix}
$$

Then we can factorize $\A$ as

$$
\A = \mathbf P \D \inv{\mathbf P}
$$

Furthermore, this helps us exponentiate $\A$:

$$
\begin{align*}
\A^2 &= \A \A \\
&= \mathbf P \D \underbrace{\inv{\mathbf P} \mathbf P}_{=\mathbf I} \D \inv{\mathbf P} \\
&= \mathbf P \D^2 \inv{\mathbf P} \\
\A^3 &= \mathbf P \D^3 \inv{\mathbf P} \\
&\ \ \vdots \\
\A^n &= \mathbf P \D^n \inv{\mathbf P}
\end{align*}
$$

So we can calculate $\A^n$ just by exponentiating $\D$, which is easy because it's diagonal!

$$
\D^n = \begin{pmatrix} \phi_1^n & \\ & \phi_2^n \end{pmatrix}
$$

Thus, $\A^n$ blows up if $\D^n$ blows up, and $\D^n$ blows up if any of its components blows up, i.e. if either $\phi_1^n$ or $\phi_2^n$ blows up.

## Homework

I'm getting tired of writing this, and I've given you the main idea of the analysis. See if you can finish this, and investigate when BDF2 is stable! Can you do it for BDF3? What about [SBDF2](https://www.jstor.org/stable/2158449)?